docs/git.md, before:

# Software Engineering / Tools / Git Source Control Management (SCM)

Git is a source control management tool that helps to keep track of changes made to a codebase.

This page provides an overview of some useful concepts and commands.

- [Software Engineering / Tools / Git Source Control Management (SCM)](#software-engineering--tools--git-source-control-management-scm)
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Installation on Ubuntu 16.04](#installation-on-ubuntu-1604)
- [Git Branching Models](#git-branching-models)
  - [GitFlow](#gitflow)
  - [Trunk-Based Development](#trunk-based-development)
- [Initialisation](#initialisation)
  - [Clone a repository](#clone-a-repository)
  - [Create a new repository](#create-a-new-repository)
- [Remote management](#remote-management)
  - [Add a Git remote](#add-a-git-remote)
  - [Update the Git remote](#update-the-git-remote)
- [Retrieving changes](#retrieving-changes)
  - [Fetch changes](#fetch-changes)
  - [Merge changes](#merge-changes)
  - [Pull changes](#pull-changes)
  - [Pull with Rebase](#pull-with-rebase)
  - [Rebase](#rebase)
- [Saving changes](#saving-changes)
  - [Stashing](#stashing)
  - [Staging](#staging)
  - [Commiting](#commiting)
  - [Commiting without any changes](#commiting-without-any-changes)
- [Modifying changes](#modifying-changes)
  - [Adding a file to a previous commit](#adding-a-file-to-a-previous-commit)
  - [Squash commit](#squash-commit)
  - [Uncommit last commit](#uncommit-last-commit)
  - [Reverting a commit](#reverting-a-commit)
- [Submitting changes](#submitting-changes)
  - [Pushing](#pushing)
  - [Force Pushing](#force-pushing)
- [Assessing changes](#assessing-changes)
  - [View all current changes](#view-all-current-changes)
  - [View commit history](#view-commit-history)
  - [View difference between commits](#view-difference-between-commits)
- [Viewing repository information](#viewing-repository-information)
  - [View the Git configuration](#view-the-git-configuration)
  - [Check which branch you're on](#check-which-branch-youre-on)
  - [See all remotes](#see-all-remotes)
  - [Checking which .gitignore is ignoring a file](#checking-which-gitignore-is-ignoring-a-file)

# Installation

## Installation on Ubuntu 16.04

```sh
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:git-core/ppa;
sudo apt-get update;
sudo apt-get install git;
```

# Git Branching Models

## GitFlow

GitFlow is a branching model for Git created by Vincent Driessen.

- Generally seen in more traditional enterprise software development where process and stability is prioritised over agility (think Waterfall)
- 5 types of branches:
  - `master` branch
  - `hotfix` branch 
  - `release` branch
  - `develop` branch 
  - `feature` branch 

- [https://datasift.github.io/gitflow/IntroducingGitFlow.html](https://datasift.github.io/gitflow/IntroducingGitFlow.html)

## Trunk-Based Development

Trunk-Based Development is a branching model where developers commit and push to the `master` branch continuously.

- Generally seen in more modern software development teams where process and stability is deprioritised over business agility (think Agile)
- Typically seen with Continuous Delivery (CD) pipelines
- Usually requires the following to successfully implement/reap full benefits:
  - Agile Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC)
  - Service-oriented architectures (SOA)
  - Observability instrumentation
  - Feature toggling

- [https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/](https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/)

# Initialisation

## Clone a repository

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to make a local copy of code from a public repository I found online.

```sh
# for http-based
git clone https://zephinzer@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net

# for ssh-based
git clone ssh://git@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net
```

## Create a new repository

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to initialise a new Git repository on my computer.

```sh
git init
```

# Remote management

## Add a Git remote

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to add a new remote named `origin` to my repository.

```sh
git remote add origin ssh://git@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net
```

## Update the Git remote

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to update the URL for my remote named `origin` in my repository.

```sh
git remote set-url origin ssh://git@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net
```

# Retrieving changes

## Fetch changes

Fetching retrieves the changes but **does not** merge the changes with your local copy.

!!! Info "Why"
    I would like to get updates from the remote but I don't want to update my code yet.

```sh
git fetch
```

## Merge changes

Merging takes the remote changes that have been fetched from the remote and merges them with your local copy.

!!! Info "Why"
    I have reviewed the changes I retrieved from the remote and I want to update my local code to match the remote's copy now.

```sh
git merge HEAD
```

## Pull changes

Pulling basically does a fetch and merge.

!!! Info "Why"
    I would like to update my code so that it is the same as the remote's.

```sh
git pull
```

## Pull with Rebase

Pulling with rebase does a fetch, but before merging in the remote changes, it rolls back to a state before all remote changes were made, applies the remote changes, and then applies your local changes.

!!! Info "Why"
    I would like to update my code by placing whatever's from the remote before my current changes so that it is the same as the remote's and I don't have a merge commit.

```sh
git pull -r
```

## Rebase

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to pull in changes from another branch that's available locally and place those changes before the changes I've committed.

```sh
# assuming we are on branch feature_x pulling in updates from master
git rebase master
```

# Saving changes

## Stashing

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to temporarily store my unstaged changes so that I can pull in the latest updates from the remote.

```sh
# put all unstaged changes into a stash
git stash

# checking stashed changes
git stash list

# popping the last stashed change
git stash pop
```

## Staging

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to add file(s) that will be 'saved' during a commit.

```sh
# to stage all changes, run this from project root
git add .

# to stage only one file
git add ./path/to/changed_file
```

## Commiting

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to save my changes to my local Git repository.

```sh
git commit -m 'some message'
```

## Commiting without any changes

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to add a commit to my local repository without adding any files
    - I would like to have a commit that can trigger a pipeline in the remote source control

```sh
git commit --allow-empty 'some message'
```

# Modifying changes

## Adding a file to a previous commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I forgot to run `git add` on a file that should be in the previous commit.

```sh
# stage the missing file first
git add ./path/to/missed/file;

# this will add the staged file to the previous commit
git commit --amend
```

## Squash commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I have made 5 commits and I would like to compress them into a single commit so my Git history is cleaner.

```sh
# indicate `p` or `pick` for the head commit, and `s` or `squash` for the rest
git rebase -i HEAD~5
```

## Uncommit last commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to reverse the last commit but leave changes I made intact

```sh
# this will leave the committed files as staged
git reset --soft HEAD^

# this will also unstage all changes
git reset HEAD^
```

## Reverting a commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to create a commit that reverses the changes in a certain commit with hash `${COMMIT_HASH}`

```sh
# use `git log` to find the commit hash of the commit you wish to undo the effects of
git revert ${COMMIT_HASH}
```

# Submitting changes

## Pushing

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like push all committed changes from my computer to the remote

```sh
git push
```

## Force Pushing

!!! Info "Why"
    - I have modified a commit locally and am unable to push normally to the remote since I rewrote history (**WARNING**: this will erase any changes others may have made between when the original commit was made, and your current commits)

```sh
git push -f
```

# Assessing changes

## View all current changes

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to see what files have been staged

```sh
git status
```

## View commit history

!!! Info "Why"
    - I want to do an interactive rebase (squashing) and I would like to see which commit I should rebase up till
    - I want to see what changes have been made by other team members/developers

```sh
# interactive browsing of git commits
git log

# output only the last 5 logs
git log -n 5
```

## View difference between commits

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to check out what changes have been made between two commits

```sh
# view file changes from HEAD to ${COMMIT_HASH}
git diff HEAD ${COMMIT_HASH}
```

# Viewing repository information

## View the Git configuration

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to see who am I committing code as

```sh
git config -l
```

## Check which branch you're on

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to confirm which branch I am on

```sh
git branch
```

## See all remotes

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to see which remotes I am pushing to

```sh
git remote -v
```

## Checking which `.gitignore` is ignoring a file

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to know which `.gitignore` is causing a file to be ignored without any obvious reason

```sh
cd `./path/to`;
git check-ignore -v *;
```

Commit message:

added section on rebasing till remote/origin/master

docs/git.md, after:

# Software Engineering / Tools / Git Source Control Management (SCM)

Git is a source control management tool that helps to keep track of changes made to a codebase.

This page provides an overview of some useful concepts and commands.

- [Software Engineering / Tools / Git Source Control Management (SCM)](#software-engineering--tools--git-source-control-management-scm)
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Installation on Ubuntu 16.04](#installation-on-ubuntu-1604)
- [Git Branching Models](#git-branching-models)
  - [GitFlow](#gitflow)
  - [Trunk-Based Development](#trunk-based-development)
- [Initialisation](#initialisation)
  - [Clone a repository](#clone-a-repository)
  - [Create a new repository](#create-a-new-repository)
- [Remote management](#remote-management)
  - [Add a Git remote](#add-a-git-remote)
  - [Update the Git remote](#update-the-git-remote)
- [Retrieving changes](#retrieving-changes)
  - [Fetch changes](#fetch-changes)
  - [Merge changes](#merge-changes)
  - [Pull changes](#pull-changes)
  - [Pull with Rebase](#pull-with-rebase)
  - [Rebase](#rebase)
- [Saving changes](#saving-changes)
  - [Stashing](#stashing)
  - [Staging](#staging)
  - [Commiting](#commiting)
  - [Commiting without any changes](#commiting-without-any-changes)
- [Modifying changes](#modifying-changes)
  - [Adding a file to a previous commit](#adding-a-file-to-a-previous-commit)
  - [Squash commit](#squash-commit)
    - [Squashing till origin/master/HEAD](#squashing-till-originmasterhead)
  - [Uncommit last commit](#uncommit-last-commit)
  - [Reverting a commit](#reverting-a-commit)
- [Submitting changes](#submitting-changes)
  - [Pushing](#pushing)
  - [Force Pushing](#force-pushing)
- [Assessing changes](#assessing-changes)
  - [View all current changes](#view-all-current-changes)
  - [View commit history](#view-commit-history)
  - [View difference between commits](#view-difference-between-commits)
- [Viewing repository information](#viewing-repository-information)
  - [View the Git configuration](#view-the-git-configuration)
  - [Check which branch you're on](#check-which-branch-youre-on)
  - [See all remotes](#see-all-remotes)
  - [Checking which `.gitignore` is ignoring a file](#checking-which-gitignore-is-ignoring-a-file)

# Installation

## Installation on Ubuntu 16.04

```sh
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:git-core/ppa;
sudo apt-get update;
sudo apt-get install git;
```

# Git Branching Models

## GitFlow

GitFlow is a branching model for Git created by Vincent Driessen.

- Generally seen in more traditional enterprise software development where process and stability is prioritised over agility (think Waterfall)
- 5 types of branches:
  - `master` branch
  - `hotfix` branch 
  - `release` branch
  - `develop` branch 
  - `feature` branch 

- [https://datasift.github.io/gitflow/IntroducingGitFlow.html](https://datasift.github.io/gitflow/IntroducingGitFlow.html)

## Trunk-Based Development

Trunk-Based Development is a branching model where developers commit and push to the `master` branch continuously.

- Generally seen in more modern software development teams where process and stability is deprioritised over business agility (think Agile)
- Typically seen with Continuous Delivery (CD) pipelines
- Usually requires the following to successfully implement/reap full benefits:
  - Agile Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC)
  - Service-oriented architectures (SOA)
  - Observability instrumentation
  - Feature toggling

- [https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/](https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/)

# Initialisation

## Clone a repository

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to make a local copy of code from a public repository I found online.

```sh
# for http-based
git clone https://zephinzer@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net

# for ssh-based
git clone ssh://git@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net
```

## Create a new repository

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to initialise a new Git repository on my computer.

```sh
git init
```

# Remote management

## Add a Git remote

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to add a new remote named `origin` to my repository.

```sh
git remote add origin ssh://git@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net
```

## Update the Git remote

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to update the URL for my remote named `origin` in my repository.

```sh
git remote set-url origin ssh://git@github.com/zephinzer/blog.joeir.net
```

# Retrieving changes

## Fetch changes

Fetching retrieves the changes but **does not** merge the changes with your local copy.

!!! Info "Why"
    I would like to get updates from the remote but I don't want to update my code yet.

```sh
git fetch
```

## Merge changes

Merging takes the remote changes that have been fetched from the remote and merges them with your local copy.

!!! Info "Why"
    I have reviewed the changes I retrieved from the remote and I want to update my local code to match the remote's copy now.

```sh
git merge HEAD
```

## Pull changes

Pulling basically does a fetch and merge.

!!! Info "Why"
    I would like to update my code so that it is the same as the remote's.

```sh
git pull
```

## Pull with Rebase

Pulling with rebase does a fetch, but before merging in the remote changes, it rolls back to a state before all remote changes were made, applies the remote changes, and then applies your local changes.

!!! Info "Why"
    I would like to update my code by placing whatever's from the remote before my current changes so that it is the same as the remote's and I don't have a merge commit.

```sh
git pull -r
```

## Rebase

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to pull in changes from another branch that's available locally and place those changes before the changes I've committed.

```sh
# assuming we are on branch feature_x pulling in updates from master
git rebase master
```

# Saving changes

## Stashing

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to temporarily store my unstaged changes so that I can pull in the latest updates from the remote.

```sh
# put all unstaged changes into a stash
git stash

# checking stashed changes
git stash list

# popping the last stashed change
git stash pop
```

## Staging

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to add file(s) that will be 'saved' during a commit.

```sh
# to stage all changes, run this from project root
git add .

# to stage only one file
git add ./path/to/changed_file
```

## Commiting

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to save my changes to my local Git repository.

```sh
git commit -m 'some message'
```

## Commiting without any changes

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to add a commit to my local repository without adding any files
    - I would like to have a commit that can trigger a pipeline in the remote source control

```sh
git commit --allow-empty 'some message'
```


- - -


# Modifying changes

## Adding a file to a previous commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I forgot to run `git add` on a file that should be in the previous commit.

```sh
# stage the missing file first
git add ./path/to/missed/file;

# this will add the staged file to the previous commit
git commit --amend
```

## Squash commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I have made 5 commits and I would like to compress them into a single commit so my Git history is cleaner.

```sh
# indicate `p` or `pick` for the head commit, and `s` or `squash` for the rest
git rebase -i HEAD~5
```

### Squashing till origin/master/HEAD

!!! Info "Why"
    - I have made X number of commits to my branch and want to squash/rebase my commits within my branch so that a rebase with master will be cleaner

```sh
git rebase -i HEAD~$(git log --oneline master..HEAD | wc -l);
```

## Uncommit last commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to reverse the last commit but leave changes I made intact

```sh
# this will leave the committed files as staged
git reset --soft HEAD^

# this will also unstage all changes
git reset HEAD^
```

## Reverting a commit

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to create a commit that reverses the changes in a certain commit with hash `${COMMIT_HASH}`

```sh
# use `git log` to find the commit hash of the commit you wish to undo the effects of
git revert ${COMMIT_HASH}
```

# Submitting changes

## Pushing

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like push all committed changes from my computer to the remote

```sh
git push
```

## Force Pushing

!!! Info "Why"
    - I have modified a commit locally and am unable to push normally to the remote since I rewrote history (**WARNING**: this will erase any changes others may have made between when the original commit was made, and your current commits)

```sh
git push -f
```

# Assessing changes

## View all current changes

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to see what files have been staged

```sh
git status
```

## View commit history

!!! Info "Why"
    - I want to do an interactive rebase (squashing) and I would like to see which commit I should rebase up till
    - I want to see what changes have been made by other team members/developers

```sh
# interactive browsing of git commits
git log

# output only the last 5 logs
git log -n 5
```

## View difference between commits

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to check out what changes have been made between two commits

```sh
# view file changes from HEAD to ${COMMIT_HASH}
git diff HEAD ${COMMIT_HASH}
```

# Viewing repository information

## View the Git configuration

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to see who am I committing code as

```sh
git config -l
```

## Check which branch you're on

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to confirm which branch I am on

```sh
git branch
```

## See all remotes

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to see which remotes I am pushing to

```sh
git remote -v
```

## Checking which `.gitignore` is ignoring a file

!!! Info "Why"
    - I would like to know which `.gitignore` is causing a file to be ignored without any obvious reason

```sh
cd `./path/to`;
git check-ignore -v *;
```
